I'm going to teach you three levels of
rain animation in After Effects. We are
going to increase the difficulty level
as we climb the evolutionary tree. Not
only by using more advanced techniques,
but by using basic techniques in smarter
and smarter ways.
[Music]
So, in a mode, we'll go over to our
effects and presets panel and type in
rain to see if anything comes up. And
here we have CC rainfall. That sounds
just like what we want. Let's add that
to a black solid. And that's certainly
rain, but we can make it look much
better. Let's bump up the opacity to see
it a little more. And the size, too.
Now, it also reflects the background by
default, which makes it a bit harder to
see. So, let's turn that influence all
the way down. And let's also put a
lovely gradient behind our rain and
change the rains blending mode from
normal to screen to see behind it. Let's
turn the drops quite a bit down as well.
And this effect has two really amazing
tricks up its sleeve. The first is
speed. The speed controls how fast or
how slow the raindrops fall and also
their length as well. The faster they
are, the more the raindrops smear and we
get these bigger lines for the
raindrops. When it's really slow, they
are just circles. And we can animate
this for a nice speed ramp. So, let's
key frame this starting really high.
Let's go to 15,000. There we go. Very
fast. Key frame that there. And then
about 2 seconds later, let's really
lower it to maybe 150. Let's add a bit
of easing. And look at that. And I'm
also not too keen on the rain all going
in very slightly different directions.
So, let's turn the spread from six down
to zero. So, now they're all going
straight downwards. And at the really
slow speed, we can see the second great
thing about this effect, and that is
that there is depth. Depth in 3D space.
These drops have parallax. The drops
that are closer are a little larger and
they move faster, which is harder to see
in the chaos, but you really do notice
it once they start to slow down. And we
can adjust that with the scene depth.
Let's increase it a little bit more.
Let's not go crazy. And in our extras,
we can enhance that even more with the
ground level percentage. So, if we
adjust this, we can see some of the
raindrops are disappearing. And this is
where they would hit the ground and
disappear. So, we get even extra depth
there. And we can create a simple splash
animation for each of these raindrops.
So I'll grab my ellipse tool, create an
ellipse, and animate it, increasing its
size and fading out. And even at the a
level, we know to animate an ellipse's
size and not its scale. That way, we can
keep it stroke width consistent. Now, we
can trim that layer, place it where one
of the raindrops disappears, and we've
got a convincing little splash. Now, we
can pre-ompose that splash and drag that
wherever the drops disappear. There we
get a lovely peaceful rainy scene with a
speed ramp and lots of depth. Not bad
for an ape. I will be honest though,
timing all of those splashes took ages.
So, I only did half the screen, which
you can only really get away with if
your animation is from the POV of a
pirate. But you know what they say, you
pay peanuts, you get monkeys. I know
monkeys aren't apes.
For the elevated ape, we're after a more
cool and stylized rain effect. And much
like our ancestors, we are leaving the
trees and going to take our attention to
the ground. How the raindrops interact
with it, but this time in a much smarter
way. We're evolving. I was inspired by
this image, thinking that those two
colors with the rings overlapping into
the alternate color looked really cool.
The first way I tried to do this was
with a single ripple comp with three
circles expanding then fading away. They
each have a drop shadow, so there's a
black and white version of each circle.
I put a bunch of those comps in a line
and then overy background. Then I added
just a couple of effects, a threshold to
restrict it to either black or white,
and then a tint to recolor it. Now, this
isn't too bad. The core idea is there,
but it would need a fair bit more
attention to get it looking the way I
wanted. And I found an easier way. I
discovered the effect CC drizzle. And
this is what it looks like by default.
It has all those ripples randomly and
has that interaction when they overlap.
Exactly what we want. Now, let's start
from scratch in a new comp. We'll create
a new solid with Ctrl + Y. We'll make it
gray, but we'll make the height about
three times larger than our comp. And
I'll explain why soon. Add the drizzles
to that. Uh, we'll increase the drip
rate a little bit more to eight to fill
up our larger solid. Open up the
shading. And we'll increase the diffuse
lighting to the max so we can see more
of the detail of the ripples. And we
will need this a bit darker. So let's
take down the ambient light to maybe 15
or so. Now to make these look like we
are looking at them from a lower angle
and not directly above, what we can do
is unlink the scale of this layer and
then lower the vertical scale squashing
it. This is why we started with that
comp being much taller so we can scale
it down without a running out of layer.
Then on a new adjustment layer which we
are going to rename to effects because
we always label our layers. Let's add
the threshold effect. And this starts
really shaping it into that final look
we want that will just be two colors.
Now I do want a clear separation of
light and shadow in here. And we can do
that by on our drizzle layer opening up
the light properties and changing it
from distant light which is kind of far
away and lighting everything evenly to
point light which lights only in a
specific area. And let's move that light
position to the very center of our comp.
And we can lower the light height as
well so it shines on a smaller and
smaller area. And the light is still
catching a lot of these ripples far away
from the light. But if we do lower the
ripple height, that should get rid of a
lot of those. I don't want a few, but
not too many. There. Now we're getting
very close. And we can also adjust the
light intensity as well to grow and
shrink how much of that area is
illuminated. And just tweak all of these
values, the ambient light, the diffuse
as well, just to hone in on the the look
we want. I like it around this level.
Now, to make it a bit more moody, let's
add some more effects. a lot of my very
frequently used favorites. Let's add a
tint to recolor it. We'll map the black
to a very, very dark gray and the white
to a pure blue. We'll add a bit of
gausian blur to soften it. And we'll
treat ourselves to a deep glow. You do
have to be subtle though. Homminids are
more than capable to use tools very
skillfully. So, do remember if you're
walking upright, keep the glow light.
And if you don't have deep glow, a few
regular glows are just fine. We'll add a
transform effect with a wiggle on the
position property to add that tiny shake
for some gate weave. I talked a lot
about that in my last video. Good old
posterized time to set the frame rate to
12 frames per second. And then some
grain with some noise HLS auto. And for
some extra atmosphere, let's add some
raindrops falling that might catch this
light. So I'll grab the pen tool and
just draw a line coming straight down.
We'll animate its shape path. We only
need to do that over about three key
frames. I'll say I'll make them all hold
key frames so there's no blending in
between them and we get something like
that. And let's put that under the
adjustment layer. And we'll set it
blending mode from normal to difference.
This way it'll show the inverse of
what's underneath it. So when it's on
top of black it'll become blue. And when
it's on top of blue it'll become black.
Well, it will all be black and white,
but the the tint will be turning it into
into blue or black. Now let's move the
anchor point to the very bottom of that
layer. hit R on our keyboard and adjust
the rotation of that drop to have it
coming in from any angle we like. And we
can get really smart with this. Let's
duplicate this layer. Let me just nudge
that over for a second. And on the
rotation of this raindrop, I'm simply
going to get the pick whip and select
the rotation of our first one. So now
they are linked. And every duplicate I
make, the rotation can be adjusted from
that original one. So the direction will
be consistent across every raindrop we
make. Now that's evolution, baby. Let's
spread them out across the scene there.
I'm not trying to match the ripples,
just match the vibe.
[Music]
Now, that's something I could lowfi
study and relax to. And if we turn that
effects layer on and off, we can see
just how much those effects are shaping
the result. The threshold effect in
particular, I am absolutely threshold
pills at the moment. It's such a great
effect for pulling interesting 2D
stylized looks out of 3D looking effects
that just uh don't quite get there on
their own. No disrespect to CC Drizzle,
all my drizzlers out there. And before
we get to the very highest third
evolutionary level of rain, let's split
the evolutionary line where apes now
have full control over the planet and
take the core of this effect to push it
even further.
So, I thought this effect could make a
really cool movie title for maybe an 80s
horror film. So I slapped some text over
the top. Change it blending mode again
to difference. And when I tried a
boulder weight, I loved how the ripples
kind of came in and out of the text. The
difference inverting them right next to
one another made it look a bit kind of
checkerboardy and not natural at all.
But I knew I could do a much better job
with just a few changes. So instead of
laying the text over the ripples, let's
use the shape of the ripples themselves
to warp the letters using a displacement
map. So let's change their blending mode
back to normal. And we want to add the
effect displacement map to that text
layer. Now for our displacement map
layer, we want to use our drizzle layer
and make sure we use the effects and
mask as the source because those ripples
are being made by that drizzle effect.
And now we can also hide that drizzle
layer. We'll need a a background. I'll
quickly make a black background with a
solid. And we can also hide those
raindrops for now. Can barely see it
now, but if we increase the amount of
horizontal displacement, we can start to
see the effect working. the darker
values in that drizzle layer warping our
text layer to the right. It's
technically using the red values for the
displacement here. But because our
drizzle layer is grayscale, the red, the
green, the blue give the same result.
True equality. And now it looks like our
text is either on or underneath some
water that is being disturbed by those
ripples, which is exactly what we want.
There is just two things we need to
correct. First is that the pin light,
which is making it brighter in the
middle, is kind of warping the center.
So on our drizzle layer, let's change
that light from point light to distant
light. We can hide it again. Put our
effects back on. That sorts that out.
And now our ripples are back to being
perfect circles as seen from above,
which is okay. That works fine if you
want that. But I want these to appear at
an angle. Now this is happening because
our displacement map effect is not
taking into account that we've squashed
the scale on that uh drizzle layer. So
we can easily fix that just by pre-mping
this drizzle layer and making sure we
move all attributes to the new
composition. And now our ripples are
nice and squashed because that
displacement map is looking at a comp
that has squashed layers inside it. Now
we can tweak the ripples to get the
effect we want there. Now it's looking
really like it's under some water.
Another thing you might have noticed is
that the displacement map is pushing our
layer out of the center a bit down and
to the right. Now we could just nudge it
back into the center and eyeball it to
get it in the middle, but that wouldn't
be very Dr. Zas of us, now would it? To
keep this and any other layers we might
want to use in the center, all we need
to do is go into that drizzle pre-MP and
make this background a perfect 50% gray.
At the moment, it is a little bit
darker. So, it is displacing everything
to the right. But if it's a completely
neutral 50% gray, just the ripples will
affect the text, not the darkness of the
background. Now, I find the easiest way
to do this is to just create a shape
layer, make sure its color is exactly
50% gray, and then adjust the ambient
shading on that drizzle to match. Now,
as homminids, we have traded our night
vision for incredible color perception.
So, this should be no trouble at all.
And now, we don't need the shape layer
anymore. So, we can just fling that off
onto looking bystanders. And back in our
main comp, our text is centered
beautifully. We can bring back those
raindrops. Maybe move them into some new
positions. I do want to make sure they
are on top of our text as well. And then
think of the perfect title for an 80s
slasher movie.
[Music]
Now, the most important skill in any
motion design project is problem
solving. Figuring out what you want to
communicate and how to achieve that with
design and animation. Over the last 5
years, I've been teaching that to
thousands of motion designers. I've
created three courses that cover
animation from absolute beginner to an
advanced level and the design process in
ridiculous detail as well. Not just
executing like a motion designer, but
thinking like one, too. If you want to
level up your motion design skills, I've
spent a year building each of these
courses to help you do that as quickly
and effectively as possible. I teach a
structured format that builds on each
skill while creating new projects for
your portfolio at each stage. And we've
created some incredible student collab
projects as well. You'll also save
hundreds of dollars when you bundle
courses together. And in the end, you
might just explode. They're all on
benmaret.com. Come and learn motion
design with me.
And when our consciousness finally
escapes its physical form and we can
perceive every possible creation
imaginable, we can achieve some pretty
nice animation in After Effects.
So, I recently made this chili
animation. I painted this chili and
animated over it to match the painterly
texture. Uh, this was done frame by
frame and took ages. So, I would not use
that process again. Instead, for this
video, I wanted to create something
similar, but more detailed and with a
bit more of a cleverer process in After
Effects. If you're curious about this,
here is the the 202 process that I took.
I did the roughs in Calipeg on my iPad.
I wanted to do the cleanup in Procreate
Dreams, but I forgot it didn't have a
selection tool until it was too late,
and I had already done a bunch. So, I
then had to move it again into Photoshop
to clean it up. Then I added text and
texture in After Effects. This is also
included in that project file if you
want to dig around in there. So I found
a nice satisfying slow motion raindrop
video to use as a reference. And this
really has two main components. The
water drop falling and the ripples. The
raindrop is just a circle with a
gradient. And we also have a gradient
background, too. I kept everything in
grayscale because we can color those
with effects later. For the ripples, I
figured I could create a single one and
then duplicate that for all the others.
So, we'll start with that one first.
This is what the final result of that
looks like. And this was a bit of a
repetitive process with a fair bit of
experimentation to get this look. So,
instead of going through it step by
step, which would take much too long and
be very boring, I'm going to walk you
through what each one of these layers
does and what they're adding to this
effect. Again, everything is included in
the project files. So, this is in a
separate comp. Now, the background is
gray, but that is just so we can see
this clearly. If we turn the
transparency on, we can see that it is
just these ripples and their shading.
That's so that when we start stacking
the ripples so we can see the ones
underneath. So let's remove everything
back to the first layer. Pretty much the
only animation in this whole thing which
is a single ellipse increasing its size.
And I've got a few key frames on it
stroke width as well. Just expanding and
easing in pretty slowly. I'll put the
background back on. And I have two
effects on that. I have a gausian blur
just for some initial softening. And
then I have a directional blur as well
which softens it more horizontally. And
that's to create a bit more of a
tapering effect as this kind of rolls
off the edges into the sort of the flat
plane of the water or at least give that
illusion. Then I created a duplicate
version of that layer and lowered it
down. So this sits underneath and is
even more blurred to get more of that
tapered look. So it's a bit sharper at
the top and softer at the bottom. And
that is the main shape we're working
with. Then for a highlight, I added
another duplicate. This time colored it
white and really shrank down the stroke
width. And for this one, I added two
masks. So now only this top left section
and this bottom right section of that
highlight are visible. Those masks are
also feathered as well, so we don't have
a harsh line. This comp is all about
keeping everything soft. Then some more
blurs back on top of those. And then I
did the same thing for the shading. This
is just a dark layer this time lower
down feathered masks as well in those
same areas. And then blurs back on top.
This I did set to preserve underlying
transparency. So it is only affecting
the pixels underneath. We turn
transparency back on here. That is off.
and it is sort of creating more pixels.
But if we turn this on, it is restricted
to just the existing pixels underneath.
Everything else is transparent is
preserved. Then I did two more versions
of that layer. Each one moving it
slightly down and making it a little bit
softer. Then I put an adjustment layer
over everything and animated a
directional blur and a gausian blur to
blur it out even more as it gets wider
so it gets softer and softer flattening
into the water. Now, the ultimate way to
soften it was to actually add the
gradient background from our main comp
over the top of everything and then have
that slowly fade in. So, by the end of
this comp, it will look exactly like the
background. And then a preserved
underlying transparency on that so that
again it only affects our ring and not
the rest of the comp. And then the last
thing to make it even softer was just to
add a few more duplicates of layers and
slightly darker grays which did expand
out a little bit from the ring to kind
of make it look like they are maybe
casting shadows and just make it super
super soft. And here's how that looks
back in our main comp. It gets softer
and then fades out nicely. Then it was
time to animate the raindrop. First just
falling down. And of course we want it
to enter the water. So I added a mask
which is just a shape layer with a
slight blur on it and use that as a mat
for our raindrop layer. I animated the
position of our raindrop to jump up and
down I think about three times and each
time it jumps up and down it gets
smaller. Just animating its scale so it
loses some mass while it is underneath
the water. And then on the last one it
kind of lands on the surface of the
water above the mat. And then I actually
parented it to a null. Then animated
that null scale to kind of squash and
stretch as if it was just bouncing on
the surface before it finally fades in
under the water. I created duplicates of
the ripples and lined them up for
whenever the circle entered or exited
the water. Now, having the ripple layer
on top means that it covers the ripple
layer underneath, which I did not want.
So, to get around that, what I did was
create a mask, which cuts that layer in
half, feathered that mask a little bit,
then duplicated that layer, inverted
that mask, so now these two layers have
either side of that ripple, and drag the
ripple on the bottom underneath that
previous layer in the layer stack. So,
now it looks stacked in the uh the right
order. I did that a whole bunch of
times, adding extra ripples in between
the bounces and just timing those to
make sure they all aligned up nicely.
That created a few extra layers, but
nothing too out of hand. I also added a
shadow to the raindrop, which is just an
ellipse with some blurs on it. And for
the final colors and effects, I added a
gausian blur, and that just unifies that
very sharp circle with everything
underneath it. Some grainy noise with
noise HLS auto. And then I colored it
with CC toner. Now, another extra effect
I tried and you might be after is a
slight strobing to the whole animation.
So, this is created with another
adjustment on a layer over the top of
everything. I have a curves effect on it
and I have its opacity animated to go
from 100 to zero back to 100 with a
looping expression on that. And this
curves effect is really subtle. We don't
want to have to put a warning on our
animation. And this kind of mimics a
light source flickering when filmed with
an extreme slow motion camera. I'm not
sure if it's necessary for this
animation, but it is a really useful
strong visual cue that you're watching
something in slow motion. So, a good and
really simple trick to keep up your
sleep if you ever want to lean into
that.
Most of these rain techniques and skills
we've covered have so many applications
beyond rain. Layers of feathered masks
and blurs can create softer gradients
and satisfying shading to anything.
Displacement maps can warp any layer
based on the values of another.
threshold can turn gray messes into bold
designs and CC rainfall can make rain
fall.
We have gone from knuckle dragging to
neurons bragging and made a troop of
friends along the way. Please let me
know if you'd like me to tackle any
other type of animation in three levels.
And if you want to learn more techniques
to put your motion design in a mode,
check out this video.
>> I love you, Dr. Zas.
Thank you. It's great to be